Add CloudQuery intro post (#1998)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/query-kubernetes/index.md

---
title: Introducing CloudQuery
authors: ["joe-duffy"]
tags: ["Pulumi-News", "Kubernetes"]
meta_desc: "Today we announced Pulumi CloudQuery, an SDK for programmatically querying cloud resoures."
date: "2019-11-14"
meta_image: "pulumi-crosswalk-k8s.png"
---

> Today, as part of our Crosswalk for Kubernetes announcement[link], we're introducing CloudQuery for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, we're introducing CloudQuery for
```

> Kubernetes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes as part of our Crosswalk for Kubernetes announcement[link], 
```

> CloudQuery is a relational TypeScript SDK for querying live Kubernetes resources. It makes it easy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CloudQuery is tool and SDK for querying live Kubernetes resources. It makes it easy
```

> CloudQuery is a relational TypeScript SDK for querying live Kubernetes resources. It makes it easy

Reviewer 2: I feel like we need a little more setup about the problem before we dive into the solution.  Or perhaps after a single sentence of "CloudQuery is... ", backup to articulate the problem for a paragraph, and then dive into the solution.

Author: took a shot at this. but I don't really know what you had in mind.

to answer questions that would normally be answered by hand-scripting calls to `kubectl`. Questions
like:

* How many distinct versions of MySQL are running in my cluster?
* Which Pods are scheduled on nodes with high memory pressure?
* Which Pods are publicly exposed to the internet via a load-balanced Service?

> CloudQuery supports both batch and streaming query modes. Batch queries run on a finite set of

Reviewer 2: The idea that this builds on top of the Pulumi object model seems to be missing.  That seems important to tie this in to the rest of the Pulumi ecosystem, and in part to explain how this fits in with the `pulumi query` command.

Author: Hmm, I don't think it's that important for Kubernetes, because the Pulumi object model is the Kubernetes resource model? I also think the importance is mostly strategic, and important to us—getting people to use our toolchain.

resources. But streaming queries operate on an unbounded stream of resource updates, making it easy

> to watch Kubernetes resources and to take action when specific events occur. For example:

Reviewer 2: I think the difference is more that batch queries run to completion and produce a fixed report, whereas streaming queries can be used to watch whats happening inside Kubernetes in real time.

* Post a slack notification when we run out of disk space.
* Page someone when a rollout fails.

In this post, we'll look at both batch and streaming query modes, showing examples of each. The SDK

> repository also contains a set of example queries, including instructions for how to run them.

Reviewer 2: SDK repository -> [Pulumi Query for Kubernetes](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-query-kubernetes) repository

## Batch queries

Below is one of our simplest examples, a query program that finds all distinct versions of MySQL
running in the default namespace of the active cluster of your `$KUBECONFIG` file.

The core primitive of batch queries is `list`. In this case, `list("v1", "Pod")` causes us to list
all Pods in the default namespace. The rest of the query "flattens" this list of Pods into a list of
all container images, filters out all images that don't contain the string "mysql", and filters that
down to only distinct image names.

```typescript
import * as kq from "@pulumi/query-kubernetes";

// Find all distinct versions of MySQL running in your cluster.
const mySqlVersions = kq
    .list("v1", "Pod")
    .flatMap(pod => pod.spec.containers)
    .map(container => container.image)
    .filter(imageName => imageName.includes("mysql"))
    .distinct();

mySqlVersions.forEach(console.log);
```

> Query programs are run via the `pulumi query` command. When run, output looks like the following:

Reviewer 2: Do we need to note here that this command is still `PULUMI_EXPERIMENTAL`?  More generally, do we need to provide a link to a guide for installing and using this?

repository!

## Streaming queries

The streaming query SDK allow us to continuously observe changes to any set of Kubernetes resources
and take action as a result.

The core primitive of the streaming SDK is `watch`. In the following example, we use `watch` to
watch all Events related to a Deployment, which we then print. Unlike `list`, which produces a set
of live Kubernetes resources, `watch` publishes a stream of resource updates—so that users get
notified if a resource is `ADDED`, `MODIFIED`, or `UPDATED`.

Here is a simple example that watches for Events related to a deployment called `alexbot`

```typescript
import * as kq from "@pulumi/query-kubernetes";

for await (const e of kq.watch("v1", "Event")) {
   const { apiVersion, kind, name } = e.object.involvedObject;
   if (
       apiVersion === "apps/v1" &&
       kind === "Deployment" &&
       name === "alexbot"
   ) {
       const { type, reason, message } = e.object;
       console.log(`${type} [${reason}] ${message}`);
   }
}
```

When run, we can see in real-time as the Deployment controller scales up the new ReplicaSet and
scales down the old one.

![Querying a stream of resources](query-watch.gif)

> For streaming queries over multiple resources, we expose `ResourceSet`, a convenience data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For streaming queries over multiple resources, we expose a `ResourceSet`, which is a convenience data
```

> structure, to simplify the code. `ResourceSet` observes a sequence of resource updates published by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
structure that simplifies the code. `ResourceSet` observes a sequence of resource updates published by
```

`watch`, and uses those updates to keep track of which resources currently exist. It exposes an

> `onUpdate` function, which will run any time this set is updated—i.e., whenever a resource is added,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`onUpdate` function, which will run when this set is updated; i.e. whenever a resource is added,
```

modified, or deleted from the set entirely.

In this case, when `onUpdate` is called, we run a query that filters the set of events down to those
specifically having to do with a Deployment called `alexbot`. We can rewrite the previous query
program to use `ResourceSet` in the following way:

```typescript
import * as kq from "@pulumi/query-kubernetes";

new kq.ResourceSet([kq.watch("v1", "Event")]).onUpdate(([events]) => {
   events.filter(e => {
       const { apiVersion, kind, name } = e.involvedObject;
       return (
           apiVersion === "apps/v1" &&
           kind === "Deployment" &&
           name === "alexbot"
       );
   }).forEach(e => {
       const { type, reason, message } = e;
       console.log(`${type} [${reason}] ${message}`);
   });
});
```

Running this code with `pulumi query` results in an infinite stream of events telling us about this
Deployment—when it's rolling out, when it's scaling down a ReplicaSet, and so on.

## Conclusion

CloudQuery provides powerful primitives for introspecting on, and reacting to, changes in the state

> of Kubernetes resources. These primitives make it simpler to build tools that help users to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of Kubernetes resources. These primitives make it simpler to build tools that facilitate observability and helps users to
```

understand Kubernetes applications, and to integrate event-based systems in response to them.

> One of our hopes for CloudQuery is that lowering the skill threshold for building these integrations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of our hopes for CloudQuery is that by building these simple integrations
```

> will lead to a groundswell of tooling that makes it easier to operate Kubernetes clusters by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that it will lead to a groundswell of tooling that makes it easier to operate Kubernetes clusters by
```

> automating away tedious tasks that would normally be scripted. With this toolkit, it is trivially

Reviewer: ```suggestion
automating away tedious tasks that would normally be scripted. With this toolkit,
```

> possible for teams to write linters, pre- and post-flight deployment checks, and to improve

Reviewer: ```suggestion
teams can, with minimal effort, write linters, pre- and post-flight deployment checks, and to improve
```

---
title: Introducing Pulumi Query
authors: ["joe-duffy"]
tags: ["Pulumi-News", "Kubernetes"]

> meta_desc: "Today we announced Pulumi Pulumi Query, an SDK for programmatically querying cloud resources."

Reviewer 2: "Pulumi Pulumi Query".

> meta_desc: "Today we announced Pulumi Pulumi Query, an SDK for programmatically querying cloud resources."

Reviewer 3: "Announcing Pulumi Pulumi Query, an SDK for programmatically querying cloud resources."

> date: "2019-11-14"

Reviewer 3: "2019-11-20"

meta_image: "pulumi-crosswalk-k8s.png"
---

> It is too hard to answer simple questions about Kubernetes resouces. Questions like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is too hard to answer simple questions about Kubernetes resources. Questions like:
```

> It is too hard to answer simple questions about Kubernetes resources. Questions like:

Reviewer 2: We could use a much softer and more inviting intro here.

Reviewer: We often need answers to simple questions about Kubernetes resources.

* How many distinct versions of MySQL are running in my cluster?
* Which Pods are scheduled on nodes with high memory pressure?
* Which Pods are publicly exposed to the internet via a load-balanced Service?

> Each of these questions would normally be answered by invoking `kubectl` multiple teams to list

Reviewer 2: "multiple teams"?

Reviewer: times

resources of each type, and manually parsing the output to join it together into a single report.

> Today, we're introducing Pulumi Query for Kubernetes, which aims to simplify scenarios like this.

Reviewer 2: Pretty rough transition - can we make this more natural?

Reviewer 3: Examples like these motivated us to work on Pulumi Query for Kubernetes, which aims to greatly simplify scenarios like the ones mentioned above.

Reviewer: Pulumi aims to simplify common Kubernetes operations and scenarios such as these by introducing Pulumi Query for Kubernetes.

published by `watch`, and uses those updates to keep track of which resources currently exist. It
exposes an `onUpdate` function, which will run when this set is updated; i.e., whenever a resource
is added, modified, or deleted from the set entirely.

In this case, when `onUpdate` is called, we run a query that filters the set of events down to those
specifically having to do with a Deployment called `alexbot`. We can rewrite the previous query
program to use `ResourceSet` in the following way:

```typescript
import * as kq from "@pulumi/query-kubernetes";

new kq.ResourceSet([kq.watch("v1", "Event")]).onUpdate(([events]) => {
   events.filter(e => {
       const { apiVersion, kind, name } = e.involvedObject;
       return (
           apiVersion === "apps/v1" &&
           kind === "Deployment" &&
           name === "alexbot"
       );
   }).forEach(e => {
       const { type, reason, message } = e;
       console.log(`${type} [${reason}] ${message}`);
   });
});
```

Running this code with `pulumi query` results in an infinite stream of events telling us about this
Deployment—when it's rolling out, when it's scaling down a ReplicaSet, and so on.

## Conclusion

> Pulumi Query provides powerful primitives for introspecting on, and reacting to, changes in the state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pulumi Query provides powerful primitives for introspecting and reacting to changes in the state
```
